devlog.md, before:

# Development log for CellML GA-based code

## 08.06.2015
### INFINITE valued genomes
* simulations returning INF are appropriately tagged invalid
* However output shows non-convergence of population
* BUG in select_weighted function in GAEngine.h
* test function: inf_schwefel
* Bug seems to be fixed by assigning summand of an invalid genome to 0 not 99999... 

### Negative valued genomes
* GA implementaion in GAEngine.h expects non-negative fitness
* test function: neg_schwefel
* Negative fit genomes are correctly ranked higher in population but never selected?
* 0 fit genomes are assigned 1.0/0.00...01 in calculation of cum-sum which is reasonable
* edit print_stage to tag negative fitness genomes with "!"

### INFINITE vs very large (~999999999.9999) valued fitness
* inf_schwefel tests never show the population (nor fittest)
* converge with original GA implementation
* lge_schwefel tests converge to the global minimum; large
* genomes indeed seen at the bottom of the ranked pop list
	
### INFINITE valued genome bug has been fixed

### Redundant attributes
* InitialPopulation and MaxPopulation are redundant attributes in this aplication of GA
* MaxPopulation is not used at all by the program to "set border" to population
* InitialPopulation value is used as population for GA; may require alt naming. e.g. Population
	
### TODO
* [ ] experiment.cpp
  * [ ] unused VariableHolder "params"
  * [ ] var_template's dynamics in program
  * [ ] unreferenced object "comps"

* [x] GAEngine.h
  * [x] Genome::same function uses bitwise & on bools
  * [x] Each generation's fittest should be output as a summary
  * [x] Multiple-degree CROSSOVER can be dangerous!
  * [x] build_rnd_sample is a core routine in GA - check for validity

## 09.06.2015
### Git version control
* Unable to get connection to remote repo on GitHub from Cluster

### Fixes to GAEngine.h
* Genome::same contained bitwise AND where logical AND more appropriate
* GAEngine::print_stage to output fittest genome in each generation

verbosity	|	output
----------------|----------------
0		| fittest run
1		| fittest gen & fittest so far & fittest run
1<		| pop of each gen & fittest run

* modify print_stage output:

verbosity	|	output
----------------|----------------
0		| fittest in the whole run (NO CHANGES)
1		| **fittest of each generation & fittest in the whole run**
1<		| population of each generation & fittest in the whole run (NO CHANGES)

### Add detailed feedback on genetic operations for verbosity > 2
* Selection: printf("Adding %d to population\n",mem);

### TODO
* [*] Refine genetic operators code
* [ ] Feedback of GO behaviour with 2< verbosity

## 10.06.2015
### Clean-up select_weighted code
```
GA is implemented to minimisation of *non-negative* fitness, so selection weight of 1/fitness is assigned.
Exceptions occur for invalid genomes, which are assigned (bug) NULL (999~999.999) weight, and global-minima which replace fitness in previous calculation with 0.0~01.
Such *magic numbers* are to be cleaned-up.
```
### Crossover
* Reference to *build_rnd_sample* to set up arena for breeding
  * [x] fix invalid-passing bug in build_rnd_sample
* The multiple Xover issue is definitely present, but unlikely to be harmful to GA and left with a TODO tag

```
Caution:
The population selected before crossover does not contain any invalid genomes.
Crossover **can** produce invalid genomes immediately synced by the population.
Not all steps were taken to eliminate run-time errors arising from the whole population turning invalid.
Limitations surely exist for simulations that can frequently breakdown.
```

### Mutation
* Unknown reason for line *m_Population[sample[i]].set(v);*

## 11.06.2015
### Update output for more verbose setting
The dynamics of individual genome in population should be *visible* to the user for a more verbose setting. 
* [x] Selection

```
#ifdef SEQMODE
					// Genetic operator feedback
					if(verbosity>2)
						printf("SELECT: Adding %d to population\n",mem);
#else
```

* [x] Crossover

```
//output format

CROSSOVER:
-[i] x1=________   x2=______   ...   xN=________
-[j] x1=________   x2=______   ...   xN=________
+[i] x1=________   x2=______   ...   xN=________
-[j] x1=________   x2=______   ...   xN=________
--------------------------------------------------
```

* [ ] Mutation



### Create genome sequencing member function
* [x] *print_genome(int index_to_genome);* to output a genome's alleles and corresponding values in order

## 12.06.2015
### Complete GO feedback functionality

Commit message:

Update log on GO feedback

devlog.md, after:

# Development log for CellML GA-based code

## 08.06.2015
### INFINITE valued genomes
* simulations returning INF are appropriately tagged invalid
* However output shows non-convergence of population
* BUG in select_weighted function in GAEngine.h
* test function: inf_schwefel
* Bug seems to be fixed by assigning summand of an invalid genome to 0 not 99999... 

### Negative valued genomes
* GA implementaion in GAEngine.h expects non-negative fitness
* test function: neg_schwefel
* Negative fit genomes are correctly ranked higher in population but never selected?
* 0 fit genomes are assigned 1.0/0.00...01 in calculation of cum-sum which is reasonable
* edit print_stage to tag negative fitness genomes with "!"

### INFINITE vs very large (~999999999.9999) valued fitness
* inf_schwefel tests never show the population (nor fittest)
* converge with original GA implementation
* lge_schwefel tests converge to the global minimum; large
* genomes indeed seen at the bottom of the ranked pop list
	
### INFINITE valued genome bug has been fixed

### Redundant attributes
* InitialPopulation and MaxPopulation are redundant attributes in this aplication of GA
* MaxPopulation is not used at all by the program to "set border" to population
* InitialPopulation value is used as population for GA; may require alt naming. e.g. Population
	
### TODO
* [ ] experiment.cpp
  * [ ] unused VariableHolder "params"
  * [ ] var_template's dynamics in program
  * [ ] unreferenced object "comps"

* [x] GAEngine.h
  * [x] Genome::same function uses bitwise & on bools
  * [x] Each generation's fittest should be output as a summary
  * [x] Multiple-degree CROSSOVER can be dangerous!
  * [x] build_rnd_sample is a core routine in GA - check for validity

## 09.06.2015
### Git version control
* Unable to get connection to remote repo on GitHub from Cluster

### Fixes to GAEngine.h
* Genome::same contained bitwise AND where logical AND more appropriate
* GAEngine::print_stage to output fittest genome in each generation

verbosity	|	output
----------------|----------------
0		| fittest run
1		| fittest gen & fittest so far & fittest run
1<		| pop of each gen & fittest run

* modify print_stage output:

verbosity	|	output
----------------|----------------
0		| fittest in the whole run (NO CHANGES)
1		| **fittest of each generation & fittest in the whole run**
1<		| population of each generation & fittest in the whole run (NO CHANGES)

### Add detailed feedback on genetic operations for verbosity > 2
* Selection: printf("Adding %d to population\n",mem);

### TODO
* [*] Refine genetic operators code
* [ ] Feedback of GO behaviour with 2< verbosity

## 10.06.2015
### Clean-up select_weighted code
```
GA is implemented to minimisation of *non-negative* fitness, so selection weight of 1/fitness is assigned.
Exceptions occur for invalid genomes, which are assigned (bug) NULL (999~999.999) weight, and global-minima which replace fitness in previous calculation with 0.0~01.
Such *magic numbers* are to be cleaned-up.
```
### Crossover
* Reference to *build_rnd_sample* to set up arena for breeding
  * [x] fix invalid-passing bug in build_rnd_sample
* The multiple Xover issue is definitely present, but unlikely to be harmful to GA and left with a TODO tag

```
Caution:
The population selected before crossover does not contain any invalid genomes.
Crossover **can** produce invalid genomes immediately synced by the population.
Not all steps were taken to eliminate run-time errors arising from the whole population turning invalid.
Limitations surely exist for simulations that can frequently breakdown.
```

### Mutation
* Unknown reason for line *m_Population[sample[i]].set(v);*

## 11.06.2015
### Update output for more verbose setting
The dynamics of individual genome in population should be *visible* to the user for a more verbose setting. 
* [x] Selection

```
#ifdef SEQMODE
					// Genetic operator feedback
					if(verbosity>2)
						printf("SELECT: Adding %d to population\n",mem);
#else
```

* [x] Crossover

```
//output format

CROSSOVER:
-[i] x1=________   x2=______   ...   xN=________
-[j] x1=________   x2=______   ...   xN=________
+[i] x1=________   x2=______   ...   xN=________
-[j] x1=________   x2=______   ...   xN=________
--------------------------------------------------
```

* [x] Mutation

```
//output format

MUTATION:
-[i] x1=_________ x2=__________
+[i] x1=_________ x2=__________
-----------------------------------
```

### Create genome sequencing member function
* [x] *print_genome(int index_to_genome);* to output a genome's alleles and corresponding values in order

## 12.06.2015
### Complete GO feedback functionality
Added user-feedback functionality to observe the dynamics of the genetic algorithm, namely at the *Genetic Operations* (GO).
User needs to ask for a very-verbose run of the experiment (greater than 2) to activate GO feedback. 
Dynamics of the individual genome/population at the Selection, Crossover, and Mutation stages are output appropriately.

NOTE: Genetic operators act on genomes in 'current' population, accessing population members via index.
At this stage, care should be taken in interpreting genome's index from the output, since the population summary is effectively for the 'previous' generation.
The selection operation is exactly the stage where a gene-pool for a new generation is picked. Hence, the index labelling the genomic sequence in this functionality do not correspond to the preceding population summary.
